Date: 25 Dec 2010
Categories: nesta-help
Summary: This is an article about how to make an "article" (as distinct from a "page"). This article has been summarised with this short paragraph.
Read more: Show me more

# Anatomy of an article

Okay, so how do you write an article?

## Set the date

The only thing that makes an article different to a normal page in Nesta
is that it has a date. If you check the [Markdown source][source] for
this page you'll see the date in the chunk of metadata at the top of the
file. It doesn't matter what order you enter your metadata; just make
sure that you separate the meta data from the content with a blank line.

[source]: https://github.com/gma/nesta-demo-content/raw/master/pages/anatomy-of-an-article.mdown

## Set Summary to a brief overview (optional)

If you've just clicked through here from the home page (or the [mark
up](/marking-up-pages) page) you may have noticed that this article was
summarised on that page, using an opening paragraph that is very
different to this one. That's because this page has been given some
specific summary text, using the `Summary:` metadata key.

If you'd rather your summary paragraph was just the first paragraph of
your article, copy the first paragraph to the `Summary:` metadata after
you've written it.

If we'd left the summary out, the entire article would be shown on the
home page (or on any category pages on which it had been included). This
is the approach that Tumblr takes; all recent posts are displayed on the
same page.

## Set more metadata

See [the metadata reference][reference] for a full list of Nesta's
built-in metadata. You can also add your own metadata, but this might
not be the best place to explain that.

[reference]: http://effectif.com/nesta/metadata-reference

## The main heading

So after the metadata, comes the heading. Define your heading on one
line, in the manner that is understood by your chosen markup language.
Headings should look like this, depending on the markup language you're
using:

 * **Markdown:** # Heading
 * **Textile:** h1. Heading
 * **Haml:** %h1 Heading

Add another blank line after the heading, and then launch off into the
copy of your page...
